enhancements/monitoring: User-defined alerting rules proposal (#958)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/monitoring/alert-overrides.md

under the direct control of the cluster-monitoring-operator.

### Goals

- Give users a single, supported, and documented place to add additional rules,
  in a way that allows the cluster-monitoring-operator to provide its own
  defaulting, validation, etc.
- Allow users to apply overrides to alerting rules shipped by the platform.
- Allow users to drop unwanted platform alerts.
- User-supplied overrides are merged with platform rules -- updates to fields
  not modified by users continue to get updates.
- Resources shipped by operators remain unmodified.  No action needed from
  OpenShift developers.

### Non-Goals

- Only alerting rules are available for modification.  Not recording rules or
  other monitoring configuration.

## Proposal

The cluster-monitoring-operator will be extended with a new controller that
watches a user-supplied `ConfigMap` with a single key having the following
structure:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: alert-overrides
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
data:
  overrides.yaml: |
    overrides: # List of platform rule overrides.
    - key:
        name: "Watchdog" # Alerts are identified by name and severity tuple.

>         severity: "none"

Reviewer: The `name` & `severity` together are not enough to uniquely identify rules (for example 2 rules in different rule groups with the same name and severity).

In order to uniquely identify rules in the Console UI, we use all of: (group file, group name, rule name, rule duration, rule query, rule labels). I think we will need to do the same or something similar here.

Reviewer 2: To extend on this a bit: I think the enhancement proposal could benefit from explicitly stating whether overrides must uniquely identify a single alert or not. Overriding or dropping multiple alerts with one spec could certainly be useful.
However this adds significant complexity from the UI perspective. How can a user ensure their override does what they intend.
If we want an explicit one to one matching lets call that out and sketch how a user interaction would look like if they provide an insufficient spec (i.e. one that doesn't uniquely identify one alert).

Author: Yeah, this is a point that absolutely needs clarification, thanks.

On a fresh 4.10-nightly cluster on AWS, I only see two alerts with this problem. One is `AlertmanagerClusterFailedToSendAlerts` which is due to cluster-monitoring-operator explicitly bringing the `critical` version of the alert down to `warning` and the other is `KubeAPIErrorBudgetBurn` which is a bit more complicated. That one legitimately seems to have two versions each at the `warning` and `critical` severities. Of course there could be other instances shipped by add-ons.

I suppose this is a trade-off between preventing an override matching multiple rules, and requiring the user to specify a bunch of fields to match against -- ones that often aren't the most visible to users. Given the above, I don't think either of these options are unreasonable:

1) Consider multiple matches of name + severity as an error condition. Can't override that, sorry. We could couple this with amending the style-guide to disallow this, adding e2e tests for it in `origin`, and fixing the offending alerts.

2) Just apply the override to all matching alerts. Though, like you said, that may present UX challenges.

I guess I would lean towards the first option personally.

Reviewer 2: Having a clear an concise failure mode definitely beats a murky UI, so +1 for 1. Though it might be valuable to at least mention both approaches in this document?

Reviewer 3: another example here is Kube* rules that are generated with a `namespace=` field. SRE use this currently to determine what should/could be ignored.

Author: > another example here is Kube* rules that are generated with a namespace= field. SRE use this currently to determine what should/could be ignored.

Sorry, not sure I follow. Do you mean that you'd like to be able to match on the `namespace` label in addition to name and severity when overriding an alert?

Author: I've added some content about this failure mode.

Author: This makes sense to me. I've updated the proposal with a CRD structure that allows matching against an arbitrary set of static labels, but requires an exact match.

      action: "patch"
      labels:
        patched: true
    - key:
        name: "AlertmanagerReceiversNotConfigured"
        severity: "Warning"
      action: "drop"

    rules: # List of additional alerting rules.
    - alert: "CustomAlert"
      expr: "vector(1)"
```

The controller maintains an index of alerting rule name-and-severity pairs to
`PrometheusRule` objects, ignoring any in non-platform namespaces, i.e. any
namespace without the `openshift.io/cluster-monitoring=true` label.  When the
configuration changes, the `PrometheusRule` containing the targeted alert is
found, and the alert extracted.

For each override a new alerting rule is generated with the overrides applied on

> top of the existing rule, and this new rule is added to the "alert-overrides"

Reviewer 3: I am having a hard time grok'ing this. Could you please clarify?

- CM exists with identifiers and actions
- Existing PrometheusRules are identified using the identifiers found in the CM
- Actions are applied (Patch,Drop?) to these found PrometheusRules
- Replacement rules are added to a PrometheusRules object called "alert-overrides"
- label is add to each new replacement rule
?

Author: Yeah, that's basically it. For each entry in the `overrides` section of the `ConfigMap`, find the matching rule in the existing `PrometheusRule` objects, then apply the action -- that is either `drop` or `patch`.

If the action is `patch`, apply the user's changes on top of the existing rule, and add the result to the "alert-overrides" `PrometheusRule`. These always get a static label identifying them as a generated override rule. That label is what allows us to drop the original rule in the relabel config, because we can match only rules that *don't* have the label.

So, the last step is to then generate the `alert_relabel_configs` which drops the original version of any overridden alerts and any alerts the user specified the `drop` action for.

Author: I've added a bit trying to summarize this better in the proposal section.

`PrometheusRule` object.  Additional user-supplied rules are also added here.
All generated alerts will be given an identifying label -- currently:

> `monitoring_openshift_io__alert_override=true`

Reviewer: Could you explain the reasons for keeping the overridden rules?

Conceptually it seems simpler to actually remove an overridden rule and replace it with the new rule. That would avoid needing to add a magic label for dropped and patched rules and should reduce load on the system too. What are the benefits that make it worth keeping the old rules?

This leaves the original alerting rules present and untouched.  These, as well
as any rules listed with the `drop` action, must be ignored by the platform
Prometheus instance.  A `Secret` containing [alert_relabel_configs][1] data for

> Prometheus is generated to accomplish this:

Reviewer: Could you explain the reasons for keeping the overridden rules?

Conceptually it seems simpler to actually remove an overridden rule and replace it with the new rule. That would avoid needing to add a magic label for dropped and patched rules and should reduce load on the system too. What are the benefits that make it worth keeping the old rules?

Author: We want to be able allow limited overrides of existing rules without the operators having to do anything. We can't modify or remove existing alerts shipped by any OpenShift operator, because the operator will just revert the changes. So the only option is to generate a new alert and somehow ignore the original one.

Reviewer: Thanks. I think it would be good to briefly explain that background in the proposal.

Author: Added a note about this to the proposal section.

Author: Added a note about telemetry. Thanks.

```yaml
# Alerts to be dropped are matched against name, severity, and an empty
# override label.  The empty override label differentiates the original
# and generated alerting rules.

- source_labels: [alertname, severity, monitoring_openshift_io__alert_override]
  regex: “Watchdog;none;”
  action: drop
- source_labels: [alertname, severity, monitoring_openshift_io__alert_override]
  regex: “AlertmanagerReceiversNotConfigured;Warning;”
  action: drop
```

Note that this prevents these alerts, whether overridden or dropped, from being

> sent to Alert Manager, but they will still show up as active alerts in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sent to Alertmanager, but they will still show up as active alerts in the
```

Author: Fixed.

Prometheus API.  The OpenShift console will have to be made aware of the
labeling in order to hide these by default.

### User Stories

> - As an OpenShift user, I want to raise the severity of an alert from `Warning`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- As an OpenShift user, I want to manage the severity of an alert choosing between ("Info", "Warning", "Critical")
```

Author: Thanks, I made this a bit more general.

  to `Critical`.
- As an OpenShift user, I want to permanently disable an alert that I know does
  not pertain to my deployment.
- As an OpenShift user, I want to add labels or annotations to alerts to aide in
  routing and triage.
- As an OpenShift user, I want to rewrite the PromQL expression or duration for
  an alert in order to adjust thresholds to suit my environment.
- As an OpenShift user, I want a supported way to add custom alerts using
  metrics from components in the `openshift-*` namespaces.

### API Extensions

> None, but this is an open question.  Is there good reason to make this a CRD

Reviewer 3: +1 to CRD, could build status into suppress/changed alerts so as a user I have a summary of what I have changed?

Reviewer 4: A CRD also provides better UX since it has built-in validation and documentation mechanisms

Author: Agreed. I've added a proposed structure for a CRD now.

end to end tests.**

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Upgrade and downgrade are not expected to present a significant challenge.  The
overridden rules are reconciled against those shipped by OpenShift in real time,
so any updates are applied as needed.  On downgrade to a version not supporting
the feature, the newly generated `PrometheusRule` resource and the `Secret`
containing the relabeling configs can simply be deleted.

The biggest concern is removal, renaming, or change in severity of OpenShift
shipped rules as this may prevent a previously overridden rule from being found.

### Version Skew Strategy

This shouldn't be an issue as rules are reconciled against OpenShift rules and
regenerated as necessary as changes occur.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A -- This needs to be addressed if it's decided that a CRD is appropriate.

#### Failure Modes

TBD

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

- Initial Proof-of-Concept:
  https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/pull/1473

## Drawbacks

TBD

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 5: It would be useful to describe here why a ConfigMap is being used, instead of defining a new CRD for a regular API.

Author: Yeah, to be honest I'm not sure there's a reason other than that's what we prototyped with. It's called out as an open question. If the consensus is to just go with a CRD from the start, we can do that.

Author: We ended up deciding a CRD is best. I've added some detail about the proposed structure.

- Instead of dropping alerts via relabel config, it may be possible to have the
  operator generate silences for them.
  - Pros:
    - No / fewer changes to console.  Overridden alerts show as silenced.
  - Cons:
    - Additional complexity in cluster-monitoring-operator.

>     - Additional load on Alert Manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Additional load on Alertmanager.
```

Author: Fixed.

enabling additional add-ons increases that number.  Still, users have repeatedly
asked for a supported method of adding additional custom rules, and adjusting
thresholds, or adding labels and annotations to existing platform alerting
rules.  These modifications are currently not possible, because the alerts are
managed by operators and cannot be modified, and the addition of custom rules is
explicitly unsupported at the moment.  This proposal outlines a solution for
allowing additional user-defined rules and limited overrides of existing
platform alerting rules.

## Motivation

OpenShift is an opinionated platform, and the default alerting rules have of
course been carefully crafted to match what we think the majority of users need.
Nevertheless, users have repeatedly asked for the ability to modify alerting
rules to adjust thresholds, or to simply add labels and annotations to aide in
routing alert notifications, as well as a supported method of adding additional
alerting rules.

Users currently have the ability to add additional rules from a technical
standpoint -- by simply creating new `PrometheusRule` objects -- but this is

> explicitly unsupported at the moment.  The reason being that these resources are

Author: Done.

      action: "drop"

    rules: # List of additional alerting rules.
    - alert: "CustomAlert"
      expr: "vector(1)"
```

The controller maintains an index of alerting rule name-and-severity pairs to
`PrometheusRule` objects, ignoring any in non-platform namespaces, i.e. any
namespace without the `openshift.io/cluster-monitoring=true` label.  When the
configuration changes, the `PrometheusRule` containing the targeted alert is
found, and the alert extracted.  If multiple alerting rules with the given name
and severity are found, this is an error condition and this override cannot be
applied.  The remaining overrides may still be applied, if they are valid.

For each override a new alerting rule is generated with the overrides applied on
top of the existing rule, and this new rule is added to the "alert-overrides"
`PrometheusRule` object.  Additional user-supplied rules are also added here.
All generated alerts will be given an identifying label -- currently:
`monitoring_openshift_io__alert_override=true`

This leaves the original alerting rules present and untouched.  These, as well
as any rules listed with the `drop` action, must be ignored by the platform

> Prometheus instance.  A `Secret` containing [alert_relabel_configs][1] data for

Author: Fixed. Thanks.

original alerts via relabeling is a consequence of the fact that the existing
rules are managed by various operators.  They cannot be modified directly, as
the operators would revert the changes.

Summary:

- Watch for a user-defined list of overrides and new rules.
- For each override, find the existing rule matching the name-and-severity pair,
  and apply the action specified by the user, i.e. `patch` or `drop`.
  - If the action is `patch`, generate a new rule with supplied overrides.
  - If the action is `drop`, simply add the alert to the alert relabel config.
  - If multiple alerts match the name and severity, notify the user and skip
    this override.
- Generate new `PrometheusRule` objects for any new user-defined rules.
- Generate the [alert_relabel_configs][1] to drop original alerts that have been
  replaced with a patched version, and any that were explicitly dropped.

A note on the failure mode when multiple alerting rules match a name and
severity pair: This doesn't seem to be a big problem in practice for the current
OpenShift platform alerting rules -- there seem to be only two cases.  We may
want to add the requirement that these be unique to the [style-guide][2]

> however, and enforce this in e2e tests going forward.

Author: Have changed this to a CRD that allows matching an arbitrary set of static labels, but requires a unique match.

and limited ability to override existing platform alerting rules via a resource
under the direct control of the cluster-monitoring-operator.

### Goals

- Give users a single, supported, and documented place to add additional rules,
  in a way that allows the cluster-monitoring-operator to provide its own
  defaulting, validation, etc.
- Allow users to apply overrides to alerting rules shipped by the platform.
- Allow users to drop unwanted platform alerts.
- User-supplied overrides are merged with platform rules -- updates to fields
  not modified by users continue to get updates.
- Resources shipped by operators remain unmodified.  No action needed from
  OpenShift developers.

### Non-Goals

- Only alerting rules are available for modification.  Not recording rules or
  other monitoring configuration.

## Proposal

The cluster-monitoring-operator will be extended with a new controller that
watches an instance of a new resource type with the following structure:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1alpha1
kind: alertoverrides.monitoring.openshift.io
metadata:
  name: alert-overrides
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
spec:
  # List of overrides for alerts in platform namespaces.

>   overrides:

Reviewer 4: I think this might be redundant because the resource name is already `alertoverrides`

Author: Yeah, it's basically just there because it differentiates the list of overrides from the list of new additional rules. Not sure what else to call it.

Reviewer 4: Ah ok, I forgot about the additional rules. Then this makes sense :+1:

  - selector: # required
      alert: "KubeAPIErrorBudgetBurn" # required
      matchLabels: # optional, but multiple matches is an error reported in status.
        severity: "critical"
        long: "1h"

>     action: "patch"

Reviewer 4: Instead of having the action as a value, have we considered having it as a key? This would allow us to define different parameters for different actions in the future if such a need arises. E.g.
```
spec:
  patch:
    ...
  drop:
    ...
```

Author: I don't have a super strong opinion on this. The way it is now somehow feels like a better middle ground between being Kubernetes-ish, and looking a bit like the existing Prometheus / Alertmanager configs to me. But if the consensus is to have a separate key for each action, that works too.

Good point on changing the parameters. Though, I guess we could already add new optional parameters in the existing version, and anything else probably needs a bump to the API resource version anyway, right?

Reviewer 4: I think the advantage of separate keys is that we can have different configuration options for each operation. This makes it more visible to the user which option can be used for each action, and also adds some "typing" to action parameters.

But anyway, it's just an option to consider. I don't think it's really a show stopper to have the action as a value.

Reviewer 6: Agree. This is easier to read when we divide the list into patch, drop, add sections.

    labels:
      patched: "true"

  - selector:
      alert: "KubeAPIErrorBudgetBurn"
      matchLabels: # not a unique match, this is an error.
        severity: "critical"
    action: "patch"
    labels:

>       patched: "true"

Reviewer 2: Afaiu any patched rule will have a automatic label add to it, so that we can identify its as a patched alert. If a patch directive attempts to overwrite this generated label, we'll run into issues where users can mess with the ability to discern whether an alert stems from a shipped rule or from an overwritten one. For example assume here the generated labelname is `patched` and a patch rule adds `patched: "false"`.
The proposal should specifically call out this (error) scenario.

Author: This is a good point, but having thought about it again, we add the label identifying the alert as patched to the newly generated rule, and we do it after applying the user-supplied overrides. So in practice, it's not possible to change it. 

Also, in the relabel config, we match the original alerts by testing for the absence of the label. We don't actually care what the label's value is. So I don't think this presents a problem in the current design.

Author: Added a note about the label being added after patches are applied.

labeling in order to hide these by default.

The generation of a new `PrometheusRule` object for overrides, and dropping the
original alerts via relabeling is a consequence of the fact that the existing
rules are managed by various operators.  They cannot be modified directly, as
the operators would revert the changes.  Keeping the existing alerts in place,
and only preventing them from being sent to Alertmanager via relabeling also
allows us to continue to collect telemetry on whether these platform alerts are
firing -- even if a user has chose to completely "drop" them.

Summary:

- Watch for a user-defined list of overrides and new rules.
- For each override, find the existing rule matching the name and labels, and
  apply the action specified by the user, i.e. `patch` or `drop`.
  - If the action is `patch`, generate a new rule with supplied overrides.
  - If the action is `drop`, simply add the alert to the alert relabel config.
  - If multiple alerts match the name and labels, notify the user and skip
    this override.
- Generate new `PrometheusRule` objects for any new user-defined rules.
- Generate the [alert_relabel_configs][1] to drop original alerts that have been

>   replaced with a patched version, and any that were explicitly dropped.

Reviewer 2: I like the operator approach. I wonder if a scenario is missing here:
Should the operator not also watch `PrometheusRule` objects for changes? The original object might change requiring the generated object to be regenerated? I'm not really sure if the `PrometheusRule` object that CMO creates is an input to the object generated by this new operator.

In any case it might be worth calling this out either way here.

Author: Good point, that is already happening in the proof-of-concept branch. I added a note here about it:
> Processing of overrides is also triggered by `PrometheusRule` object changes, and changes to the set of platform namespaces.
